# ADHD and Software Engineering (WPH 207)

[Steve Kohlenberger](mailto:Steve@Strategies2Succeed.com?subject=Send me a
Survey)

"A Peak Under the Covers"

The speaker is late...Good crowd though. Some technical diffulties and affable
mumbling, and 15 minutes later...

It's a dense subject, getting more complex all the time. Even if you have
effective strategies for yourself, or have "parts" of the symptoms, and still
interact/work with people with ADHD.

We love to think and 
takes some of the filtering off, we can take risks, fun, creative.

**brain imaging**
matures 3 years later in some areas, and 1 year earlier in motor control

"if you've seen one person with ADHD, you've seen one person with ADHD."

## Aside

This is really personal, and so it's difficult to detach enough to take notes.

## Official Types

ADD is officially renamed ADHD May 2013.

- Predominantly Inattentive (F>M) ADHD-PI (20-30%)
- Hyperactive-Immpulsive (M>F) ADHD-HI (&lt;15%)
- Combined type (Inatt. + Hyper + Impul.) ADHD-C (50-70%)
  - tapping, listening to music, in order to concentrate
- Not Otherwise Specified - ADHD-NOS

"Hyperfocus" - being in the zone
  
  - what's your natural hyperfocus zone: if it's your carreer, you're set.
    Otherwise, you'd better figure it out, because you'll never be a pro.

As of this year, the definition is updated to include adults.

## Common co-morbidities (co-occurring diagnoses)

Depression, anxiety, bipolar, OCD, *asthma*, etc. ADHD is mostly genetic. Even
if ADHD is stronger, the co-morbidity is diagnosed first. Diagnose ADHD first
and the other symptoms will likely diminish.

1. Alcoholism
2. Antisocial Personality Disorder (ASPD)
3. Anxiety (25%)
6. Depression (32%)
17. Sensory integration disorders
19. Speech and communication problems

## ADHD Impostors

Environmental causes - can make it look like someone has ADHD when they don't.

It takes about 25 minutes for a healthy person to get back on track (UCI study
of a software company). Multi-tasking or interruptions will cause many
context-switches, and less focus and energy.

Sleep deprivation can cause symptoms similar to ADHD

## Hyper-focus

great to focus, tunes everyone/-thing else out.

It can be profiled: triggered, brought out

- Amygdala flooding
  - overwhelm, like a panic attack
  - caused by too much stimulus & not enough time to process
- ***NOT*** Perseveration
  - repeating the same thought/idea over and over
  - some "experts" believe that hyperfocus is just "perseveration" misnamed

## closing thoughs

- brain plasticity: an adult can be trained
  - CogMed has proven services/software for this purpose
- strategies
  - medication: temporary fixes
  - psychotherapy: exploring & correcting behaviors
  - environmental: nutraceuticals, sleep, exercise *patterns*, interruptions,
    stress...
  - coaching
  - capture distractions :)
  - establish a social support network :)

## Questions

- how does a diagnosis help. You didn't know for 30+ years, what is the benefit
  now that you know?
  - the more you know what it is, the better your life will be
- cognitive dissonance
- setting up my environment to focus


## science

  - mindfulness, meditation is proven to improve ADHDhealtth
    - spending time specifically on gratitude.
